README.md, before:

# TagGUI

<img src='images/icon.png' alt='TagGUI icon' width='128'>

Cross-platform desktop application for quickly adding and editing image tags
and captions, aimed towards creators of image datasets for generative AI models
like Stable Diffusion.

<img src='images/screenshot-v1.25.0.png' alt='TagGUI screenshot' width='100%'>

## Features

- Keyboard-friendly interface for fast tagging
- Tag autocomplete based on your own most-used tags
- Integrated Stable Diffusion token counter
- Automatic caption and tag generation with models including CogVLM, LLaVA, WD
  Tagger, and many more
- Batch tag operations for renaming, deleting, and sorting tags
- Advanced image list filtering
- Export images ready to be used for training

## Installation

The easiest way to use the application is to download the latest release from
the [releases page](https://www.github.com/jhc13/taggui/releases).
Choose the appropriate file for your operating system, extract it wherever you
want, and run the executable file inside.
You may have to install [7-Zip](https://www.7-zip.org/download.html) to
extract the files if you don't have it on your system.

- macOS users: There is no macOS release because it requires a device running
  the OS, and I do not have one. You can still install and run the program
  manually (see below).
- Linux users: You may need to install `libxcb-cursor0`.
  (See [this Stack Overflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/75941575).) You
  may also have to install `python3.12-dev` or `python3.11-dev` (depending on
  your Python version) if you get an error while trying to use a CogVLM2
  model. (See [this issue](https://github.com/jhc13/taggui/issues/234).)

Alternatively, you can install manually by cloning this repository and
installing the dependencies in `requirements.txt`.
Run `taggui/run_gui.py` to start the program.
Python 3.12 is recommended, but Python 3.11 should also work.

## Usage

Load the directory containing your images by clicking the `Load Directory`
button in the center of the window (or `File` -> `Load Directory`).
Tags are loaded from `.txt` files in the directory with the same names as the
images.
Any changes you make to the tags are also automatically saved to these `.txt`
files.

## Automatic Captioning

<img src='images/auto-captioner-v1.18.0.png' alt='Auto-captioner screenshot' width='100%'>

In addition to manual tagging, you can automatically generate captions or tags
for your images inside TagGUI.
GPU generation requires a compatible NVIDIA GPU, and CPU generation is also
supported.

To use the feature, select the images you want to caption in the image list,
then select the captioning model you want to use in the Auto-Captioner pane.
If you have a local directory containing previously downloaded models, you can
set it in `File` -> `Settings` to include the models in the model list.
Click the `Start Auto-Captioning` button to start captioning.
You can select multiple images to batch generate captions for all of them.
It can take up to several minutes to download and load a model when you first
use it, but subsequent generations will be much faster.

### Captioning parameters

`Prompt`: Instructions given to the captioning model.
Prompt formats are handled automatically based on the selected model.
You can use the following template variables to dynamically insert information
about each image into the prompt:

- `{tags}`: The tags of the image, separated by commas.
- `{name}`: The file name of the image without the extension.
- `{directory}` or `{folder}`: The name of the directory containing the image.

An example prompt using a template variable could be
`Describe the image using the following tags as context: {tags}`.
With this prompt, `{tags}` would be replaced with the existing tags of each
image before the prompt is sent to the model.

`Start caption with`: Generated captions will start with this text.

`Remove tag separators in caption`: If checked, tag separators (commas by
default) will be removed from the generated captions.

`Discourage from caption`: Words or phrases that should not be present in the
generated captions.
You can separate multiple words or phrases with commas (`,`).
For example, you can put `appears,seems,possibly` to prevent the model from
using an uncertain tone in the captions.
The words may still be generated due to limitations related to tokenization.

`Include in caption`: Words or phrases that should be present somewhere in the
generated captions.
You can separate multiple words or phrases with commas (`,`).
You can also allow the captioning model to choose from a group of words or
phrases by separating them with `|`.
For example, if you put `cat,orange|white|black`, the model will attempt to
generate captions that contain the word `cat` and either `orange`, `white`,
or `black`.
It is not guaranteed that all of your specifications will be met.

`Tags to exclude` (WD Tagger models): Tags that should not be generated,
separated by commas.

Many of the other generation parameters are described in the
[Hugging Face documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/text_generation#transformers.GenerationConfig).

## Advanced Image List Filtering

The basic functionality of filtering for images that contain a certain tag is
available by clicking on the tag in the `All Tags` pane.
In addition to this, you can construct more complex filters in
the `Filter Images` box at the top of the `Images` pane.

<details>
<summary>
Click here to see the full documentation for the filter syntax.
</summary>

### Filter criteria

These are the prefixes you can use to specify the filter criteria you want to
apply:

- `tag:`: Images that have the filter term as a tag
    - `tag:cat` will match images with the tag `cat`.
- `caption`: Images that contain the filter term in the caption
    - The caption is the list of tags as a single string, as it appears in the
      `.txt` file.
    - `caption:cat` will match images that have `cat` anywhere in the
      caption. For example, images with the tag `orange cat` or the
      tag `catastrophe`.
- `name`: Images that contain the filter term in the file name
    - `name:cat` will match images such as `cat-1.jpg` or `large_cat.png`.
- `path`: Images that contain the filter term in the full file path
    - `path:cat` will match images such as `C:\Users\cats\dog.jpg` or
      `/home/dogs/cat.jpg`.
- `size`: Images that have the given size, stated in double colon separated
  numbers.
    - `size:512:512` will match images of the dimension 512x512 pixels.
- You can also use a filter term with no prefix to filter for images that
  contain the term in either the caption or the file path.
    - `cat` will match images containing `cat` in the caption or file path.

The following are prefixes for numeric filters. The operators `=` (`==` also
works), `!=`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, and `>=` are used to specify the type of
comparison.

- `tags`: Images that have the specified number of tags
    - `tags:=13` will match images that have exactly 13 tags.
    - `tags:!=7` will match images that do not have exactly 7 tags (images with
      less than 7 tags or more than 7 tags).
- `chars`: Images that have the specified number of characters in the caption
    - `chars:<100` will match images that have less than 100 characters in the
      caption.
    - `chars:>=30` will match images that have 30 or more characters in the
      caption.
- `tokens`: Images that have the specified number of tokens in the caption
    - `tokens:>75` will match images that have more than 75 tokens in the
      caption.
    - `tokens:<=50` will match images that have 50 or fewer tokens in the
      caption.
- `x` and `y`: will match images with the specified x or y dimension.
    - `x:>512` will match images where the width is greater than 512 pixels.
    - `y:=1024` will match images where the height is exactly 1024 pixels.

### Spaces and quotes

If the filter term contains spaces, you must enclose it in quotes (either
single or double quotes).
For example, to find images with the tag `orange cat`, you must
use `tag:"orange cat"` or `tag:'orange cat'`.
If you have both spaces and quotes in the filter term, you can escape the
quotes with backslashes.
For example, you can use `tag:"orange \"cat\""` for the tag `orange "cat"`.
An alternative is to use different types of quotes for the outer and inner
quotes, like so: `tag:'orange "cat"'`.

### Wildcards

You can use the `*` character as a wildcard to match any number of any
characters, and the `?` character to match any single character.
For example, `tag:*cat` will match images with tags like `orange cat`,
`large cat`, and `cat`.

### Combining filters

Logical operators can be used to combine multiple filters:

- `NOT`: Images that do not match the filter
    - `NOT tag:cat` will match images that do not have the tag `cat`.
- `AND`: Images that match both filters before and after the operator
    - `tag:cat AND tag:orange` will match images that have both the tag `cat`
      and the tag `orange`.
- `OR`: Images that match either filter before or after the operator
    - `tag:cat OR tag:dog` will match images that have either the tag `cat` or
      the tag `dog`, or both.

The lowercase versions of these operators will also work: `not`, `and`,
and `or`.

The operator precedence is `NOT` > `AND` > `OR`, so by default, `NOT` will be
evaluated first, then `AND`, then `OR`.
You can use parentheses to change this order.
For example, in `tag:cat AND (tag:orange OR tag:white)`, the `OR` will be
evaluated first, matching images that have the tag `cat` and either the
tag `orange` or the tag `white`.
You can nest parentheses and operators to create arbitrarily complex filters.
</details>

## Controls

- ⭐ Previous / next image: `Ctrl`+`Up` / `Down` (just `Up` / `Down` also works
  in some cases)
- Jump to the first untagged image: `Ctrl`+`J`
- Focus the `Filter Images` box: `Alt`+`F`
- Focus the `Add Tag` box: `Alt`+`A`
- Focus the `Image Tags` list: `Alt`+`I`
- Focus the `Search Tags` box: `Alt`+`S`
- Focus the `Start Auto-Captioning` button: `Alt`+`C`

### Images pane

- First / last image: `Home` / `End`
- Select multiple images: Hold `Ctrl` or `Shift` and click the images
- Select all images: `Ctrl`+`A`
- Invert selection: `Ctrl`+`I`
- Right-clicking on an image will bring up the context menu, which includes
  actions such as copying and pasting tags and moving or copying selected
  images to another directory.

### Image Tags pane

- Add a tag: Type the tag into the `Add Tag` box and press `Enter`
- ⭐ Add the first tag suggested by autocomplete: `Ctrl`+`Enter`
- Add a tag to multiple images: Select the images in the image list add
  the tag
- Delete a tag: Select the tag and press `Delete`
- Rename a tag: Double-click the tag, or select the tag and press `F2`
- Reorder tags: Drag and drop the tags
- Select multiple tags: Hold `Ctrl` or `Shift` and click the tags

### All Tags pane

- Show all images containing a tag: Select the tag (When `Tag click action` is
  set to `Filter images for tag`)
- Add a tag to selected images: Click the tag (When `Tag click action` is set
  to `Add tag to selected images`)
- Delete all instances of a tag: Select the tag and press `Delete`
- Rename all instances of a tag: Double-click the tag, or select the tag and
  press `F2`

The `Edit` menu contains additional features for batch tag operations, such as
`Find and Replace` (`Ctrl`+`R`) and `Batch Reorder Tags` (`Ctrl`+`B`).

## Export

Exporting the images to a directory allows different options. By choosing the
preset for the target AI model many important settings are automatically set.

`Image selection`:
Select whether all images, or those with the current filter or only the
currently selected images should be exported.

`Preset`:
Choose a given preset or `manual` to set your own values.

`Resolution`:
The native resolution of the model, like 1024 for SDXL or Flux.

`Image size`:
A hint showing the megapixels. The exported images will not exceed this
number.

`Bucket resolution size`:
The bucket size the training tool is using.

`Preferres sizes`:
A comma separated list of target sizes that should be preferred for the
exported images.

`Allow upscaling`:
Do upscale images when set. This is bad for the quality but might reduce the
number of buckets that must be used for training.

`Bucket fitting strategy`:
The method to make sure an image fits into a bucket. It can be a direct crop
that removes information from the side of an image. Or a scaling that changes
the aspect ratio of an image and can create slight distortions. Or a
combination of both that reduces each effect.

`Output format`:
The file type and quality setting for formats that have a lossy compression.
Note: for JPEG a number above 95 should be avoided.

`Output color space`:
Most models will expect the images in sRGB format and don't contain any
color management. So it is important that the exporter handles this as
the images used for the training might use a different color space.
To save 8 kB for each image you might want to select "sRGB implicit" as that
converts the image to sRGB but doesn't store the ICC information.
When no color space convertation should happen you can choose "feed through".

The simple "sRGB" is most likely the setting you want to choose here unless
you are an expert and have special requirements.

`Export directory`:
The place to export the images to.

`Keep input directory structure`:
When the source images are organized in subdirectories this structure will
be used for the exported images as well when selected.

`Statistics`:
Preview of the generated image sizes from the export funtion.

Commit message:

All filtering for marking labels

README.md, after:

# TagGUI

<img src='images/icon.png' alt='TagGUI icon' width='128'>

Cross-platform desktop application for quickly adding and editing image tags
and captions, aimed towards creators of image datasets for generative AI models
like Stable Diffusion.

<img src='images/screenshot-v1.25.0.png' alt='TagGUI screenshot' width='100%'>

## Features

- Keyboard-friendly interface for fast tagging
- Tag autocomplete based on your own most-used tags
- Integrated Stable Diffusion token counter
- Automatic caption and tag generation with models including CogVLM, LLaVA, WD
  Tagger, and many more
- Batch tag operations for renaming, deleting, and sorting tags
- Advanced image list filtering
- Export images ready to be used for training

## Installation

The easiest way to use the application is to download the latest release from
the [releases page](https://www.github.com/jhc13/taggui/releases).
Choose the appropriate file for your operating system, extract it wherever you
want, and run the executable file inside.
You may have to install [7-Zip](https://www.7-zip.org/download.html) to
extract the files if you don't have it on your system.

- macOS users: There is no macOS release because it requires a device running
  the OS, and I do not have one. You can still install and run the program
  manually (see below).
- Linux users: You may need to install `libxcb-cursor0`.
  (See [this Stack Overflow answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/75941575).) You
  may also have to install `python3.12-dev` or `python3.11-dev` (depending on
  your Python version) if you get an error while trying to use a CogVLM2
  model. (See [this issue](https://github.com/jhc13/taggui/issues/234).)

Alternatively, you can install manually by cloning this repository and
installing the dependencies in `requirements.txt`.
Run `taggui/run_gui.py` to start the program.
Python 3.12 is recommended, but Python 3.11 should also work.

## Usage

Load the directory containing your images by clicking the `Load Directory`
button in the center of the window (or `File` -> `Load Directory`).
Tags are loaded from `.txt` files in the directory with the same names as the
images.
Any changes you make to the tags are also automatically saved to these `.txt`
files.

## Automatic Captioning

<img src='images/auto-captioner-v1.18.0.png' alt='Auto-captioner screenshot' width='100%'>

In addition to manual tagging, you can automatically generate captions or tags
for your images inside TagGUI.
GPU generation requires a compatible NVIDIA GPU, and CPU generation is also
supported.

To use the feature, select the images you want to caption in the image list,
then select the captioning model you want to use in the Auto-Captioner pane.
If you have a local directory containing previously downloaded models, you can
set it in `File` -> `Settings` to include the models in the model list.
Click the `Start Auto-Captioning` button to start captioning.
You can select multiple images to batch generate captions for all of them.
It can take up to several minutes to download and load a model when you first
use it, but subsequent generations will be much faster.

### Captioning parameters

`Prompt`: Instructions given to the captioning model.
Prompt formats are handled automatically based on the selected model.
You can use the following template variables to dynamically insert information
about each image into the prompt:

- `{tags}`: The tags of the image, separated by commas.
- `{name}`: The file name of the image without the extension.
- `{directory}` or `{folder}`: The name of the directory containing the image.

An example prompt using a template variable could be
`Describe the image using the following tags as context: {tags}`.
With this prompt, `{tags}` would be replaced with the existing tags of each
image before the prompt is sent to the model.

`Start caption with`: Generated captions will start with this text.

`Remove tag separators in caption`: If checked, tag separators (commas by
default) will be removed from the generated captions.

`Discourage from caption`: Words or phrases that should not be present in the
generated captions.
You can separate multiple words or phrases with commas (`,`).
For example, you can put `appears,seems,possibly` to prevent the model from
using an uncertain tone in the captions.
The words may still be generated due to limitations related to tokenization.

`Include in caption`: Words or phrases that should be present somewhere in the
generated captions.
You can separate multiple words or phrases with commas (`,`).
You can also allow the captioning model to choose from a group of words or
phrases by separating them with `|`.
For example, if you put `cat,orange|white|black`, the model will attempt to
generate captions that contain the word `cat` and either `orange`, `white`,
or `black`.
It is not guaranteed that all of your specifications will be met.

`Tags to exclude` (WD Tagger models): Tags that should not be generated,
separated by commas.

Many of the other generation parameters are described in the
[Hugging Face documentation](https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/main/en/main_classes/text_generation#transformers.GenerationConfig).

## Advanced Image List Filtering

The basic functionality of filtering for images that contain a certain tag is
available by clicking on the tag in the `All Tags` pane.
In addition to this, you can construct more complex filters in
the `Filter Images` box at the top of the `Images` pane.

<details>
<summary>
Click here to see the full documentation for the filter syntax.
</summary>

### Filter criteria

These are the prefixes you can use to specify the filter criteria you want to
apply:

- `tag:`: Images that have the filter term as a tag
    - `tag:cat` will match images with the tag `cat`.
- `caption`: Images that contain the filter term in the caption
    - The caption is the list of tags as a single string, as it appears in the
      `.txt` file.
    - `caption:cat` will match images that have `cat` anywhere in the
      caption. For example, images with the tag `orange cat` or the
      tag `catastrophe`.
- `marking`: Images that contain at least one marking with this label. It
  doesn't matther whether it is a hint, include or exclude marking.
- `name`: Images that contain the filter term in the file name
    - `name:cat` will match images such as `cat-1.jpg` or `large_cat.png`.
- `path`: Images that contain the filter term in the full file path
    - `path:cat` will match images such as `C:\Users\cats\dog.jpg` or
      `/home/dogs/cat.jpg`.
- `size`: Images that have the given size, stated in double colon separated
  numbers.
    - `size:512:512` will match images of the dimension 512x512 pixels.
- You can also use a filter term with no prefix to filter for images that
  contain the term in either the caption or the file path.
    - `cat` will match images containing `cat` in the caption or file path.

The following are prefixes for numeric filters. The operators `=` (`==` also
works), `!=`, `<`, `>`, `<=`, and `>=` are used to specify the type of
comparison.

- `tags`: Images that have the specified number of tags
    - `tags:=13` will match images that have exactly 13 tags.
    - `tags:!=7` will match images that do not have exactly 7 tags (images with
      less than 7 tags or more than 7 tags).
- `chars`: Images that have the specified number of characters in the caption
    - `chars:<100` will match images that have less than 100 characters in the
      caption.
    - `chars:>=30` will match images that have 30 or more characters in the
      caption.
- `tokens`: Images that have the specified number of tokens in the caption
    - `tokens:>75` will match images that have more than 75 tokens in the
      caption.
    - `tokens:<=50` will match images that have 50 or fewer tokens in the
      caption.
- `x` and `y`: will match images with the specified x or y dimension.
    - `x:>512` will match images where the width is greater than 512 pixels.
    - `y:=1024` will match images where the height is exactly 1024 pixels.

### Spaces and quotes

If the filter term contains spaces, you must enclose it in quotes (either
single or double quotes).
For example, to find images with the tag `orange cat`, you must
use `tag:"orange cat"` or `tag:'orange cat'`.
If you have both spaces and quotes in the filter term, you can escape the
quotes with backslashes.
For example, you can use `tag:"orange \"cat\""` for the tag `orange "cat"`.
An alternative is to use different types of quotes for the outer and inner
quotes, like so: `tag:'orange "cat"'`.

### Wildcards

You can use the `*` character as a wildcard to match any number of any
characters, and the `?` character to match any single character.
For example, `tag:*cat` will match images with tags like `orange cat`,
`large cat`, and `cat`.

### Combining filters

Logical operators can be used to combine multiple filters:

- `NOT`: Images that do not match the filter
    - `NOT tag:cat` will match images that do not have the tag `cat`.
- `AND`: Images that match both filters before and after the operator
    - `tag:cat AND tag:orange` will match images that have both the tag `cat`
      and the tag `orange`.
- `OR`: Images that match either filter before or after the operator
    - `tag:cat OR tag:dog` will match images that have either the tag `cat` or
      the tag `dog`, or both.

The lowercase versions of these operators will also work: `not`, `and`,
and `or`.

The operator precedence is `NOT` > `AND` > `OR`, so by default, `NOT` will be
evaluated first, then `AND`, then `OR`.
You can use parentheses to change this order.
For example, in `tag:cat AND (tag:orange OR tag:white)`, the `OR` will be
evaluated first, matching images that have the tag `cat` and either the
tag `orange` or the tag `white`.
You can nest parentheses and operators to create arbitrarily complex filters.
</details>

## Controls

- ⭐ Previous / next image: `Ctrl`+`Up` / `Down` (just `Up` / `Down` also works
  in some cases)
- Jump to the first untagged image: `Ctrl`+`J`
- Focus the `Filter Images` box: `Alt`+`F`
- Focus the `Add Tag` box: `Alt`+`A`
- Focus the `Image Tags` list: `Alt`+`I`
- Focus the `Search Tags` box: `Alt`+`S`
- Focus the `Start Auto-Captioning` button: `Alt`+`C`

### Images pane

- First / last image: `Home` / `End`
- Select multiple images: Hold `Ctrl` or `Shift` and click the images
- Select all images: `Ctrl`+`A`
- Invert selection: `Ctrl`+`I`
- Right-clicking on an image will bring up the context menu, which includes
  actions such as copying and pasting tags and moving or copying selected
  images to another directory.

### Image Tags pane

- Add a tag: Type the tag into the `Add Tag` box and press `Enter`
- ⭐ Add the first tag suggested by autocomplete: `Ctrl`+`Enter`
- Add a tag to multiple images: Select the images in the image list add
  the tag
- Delete a tag: Select the tag and press `Delete`
- Rename a tag: Double-click the tag, or select the tag and press `F2`
- Reorder tags: Drag and drop the tags
- Select multiple tags: Hold `Ctrl` or `Shift` and click the tags

### All Tags pane

- Show all images containing a tag: Select the tag (When `Tag click action` is
  set to `Filter images for tag`)
- Add a tag to selected images: Click the tag (When `Tag click action` is set
  to `Add tag to selected images`)
- Delete all instances of a tag: Select the tag and press `Delete`
- Rename all instances of a tag: Double-click the tag, or select the tag and
  press `F2`

The `Edit` menu contains additional features for batch tag operations, such as
`Find and Replace` (`Ctrl`+`R`) and `Batch Reorder Tags` (`Ctrl`+`B`).

## Export

Exporting the images to a directory allows different options. By choosing the
preset for the target AI model many important settings are automatically set.

`Image selection`:
Select whether all images, or those with the current filter or only the
currently selected images should be exported.

`Preset`:
Choose a given preset or `manual` to set your own values.

`Resolution`:
The native resolution of the model, like 1024 for SDXL or Flux.

`Image size`:
A hint showing the megapixels. The exported images will not exceed this
number.

`Bucket resolution size`:
The bucket size the training tool is using.

`Preferres sizes`:
A comma separated list of target sizes that should be preferred for the
exported images.

`Allow upscaling`:
Do upscale images when set. This is bad for the quality but might reduce the
number of buckets that must be used for training.

`Bucket fitting strategy`:
The method to make sure an image fits into a bucket. It can be a direct crop
that removes information from the side of an image. Or a scaling that changes
the aspect ratio of an image and can create slight distortions. Or a
combination of both that reduces each effect.

`Output format`:
The file type and quality setting for formats that have a lossy compression.
Note: for JPEG a number above 95 should be avoided.

`Output color space`:
Most models will expect the images in sRGB format and don't contain any
color management. So it is important that the exporter handles this as
the images used for the training might use a different color space.
To save 8 kB for each image you might want to select "sRGB implicit" as that
converts the image to sRGB but doesn't store the ICC information.
When no color space convertation should happen you can choose "feed through".

The simple "sRGB" is most likely the setting you want to choose here unless
you are an expert and have special requirements.

`Export directory`:
The place to export the images to.

`Keep input directory structure`:
When the source images are organized in subdirectories this structure will
be used for the exported images as well when selected.

`Statistics`:
Preview of the generated image sizes from the export funtion.
